\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename elpaca.texi
@settitle Elpaca User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Elpaca: (elpaca).     Elisp Package Manager.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Elpaca User Manual
@subtitle version 0.0.0
@author Nicholas Vollmer
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Elpaca User Manual

@noindent
Elpaca is an elisp package manager.
It allows users to find, install, update, and remove third-party packages for Emacs.
It is a replacement for the built-in Emacs package manager, package.el.

@quotation
Copyright (C) 2022-2023 Nicholas Vollmer

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU
General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation, either
version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

@end quotation

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Installation::                 Installing Elpaca.
* Usage::                        Using Elpaca.
* UI::                           Elpaca's package management UI.

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* Requirements::                 The required software environment for Elpaca.
* Installer::                    A script responsible for installing Elpaca.

Usage

* Quick Start::
* Basic concepts::
* use-package Integration::

Basic concepts

* Recipes::                      The recipe format description.
* Menus::                        Where recipes come from.
* Orders::                       Incomplete, or custom recipes.
* Queues::                       Order processing groups.
* Installing Packages::

Recipes

* host |fetcher: host | fetcher. 
* repo::
* branch::
* tag::
* ref::
* pin::
* depth::
* files::
* protocol::
* remotes::
* main::
* build::
* inherit::
* pre-build::
* post-build::
* autoloads::
* Inheritance precedence::
* elpaca-recipe-functions::

Menus

* elpaca-menu-functions::

Orders

* elpaca-order-functions::

UI

* Searching::                    How to search within the Elpaca UI.
* Search tags::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@menu
* Requirements::                 The required software environment for Elpaca.
* Installer::                    A script responsible for installing Elpaca.
@end menu

@node Requirements
@section Requirements

Elpaca requires:
@itemize
@item
Emacs >= 27.1
@item
git (minimum version TBD)
@end itemize

@node Installer
@section Installer

To install Elpaca, add the following elisp to your init.el.
It must come before any calls to other Elpaca functions/macros.
This will clone Elpaca into your @samp{user-emacs-directory} under the @samp{elpaca} subdirectory.
It then builds and activates Elpaca.

@lisp
(defvar elpaca-installer-version 0.6)
(defvar elpaca-directory (expand-file-name "elpaca/" user-emacs-directory))
(defvar elpaca-builds-directory (expand-file-name "builds/" elpaca-directory))
(defvar elpaca-repos-directory (expand-file-name "repos/" elpaca-directory))
(defvar elpaca-order '(elpaca :repo "https://github.com/progfolio/elpaca.git"
                              :ref nil
                              :files (:defaults "elpaca-test.el" (:exclude "extensions"))
                              :build (:not elpaca--activate-package)))
(let* ((repo  (expand-file-name "elpaca/" elpaca-repos-directory))
       (build (expand-file-name "elpaca/" elpaca-builds-directory))
       (order (cdr elpaca-order))
       (default-directory repo))
  (add-to-list 'load-path (if (file-exists-p build) build repo))
  (unless (file-exists-p repo)
    (make-directory repo t)
    (when (< emacs-major-version 28) (require 'subr-x))
    (condition-case-unless-debug err
        (if-let ((buffer (pop-to-buffer-same-window "*elpaca-bootstrap*"))
                 ((zerop (call-process "git" nil buffer t "clone"
                                       (plist-get order :repo) repo)))
                 ((zerop (call-process "git" nil buffer t "checkout"
                                       (or (plist-get order :ref) "--"))))
                 (emacs (concat invocation-directory invocation-name))
                 ((zerop (call-process emacs nil buffer nil "-Q" "-L" "." "--batch"
                                       "--eval" "(byte-recompile-directory \".\" 0 'force)")))
                 ((require 'elpaca))
                 ((elpaca-generate-autoloads "elpaca" repo)))
            (progn (message "%s" (buffer-string)) (kill-buffer buffer))
          (error "%s" (with-current-buffer buffer (buffer-string))))
      ((error) (warn "%s" err) (delete-directory repo 'recursive))))
  (unless (require 'elpaca-autoloads nil t)
    (require 'elpaca)
    (elpaca-generate-autoloads "elpaca" repo)
    (load "./elpaca-autoloads")))
(add-hook 'after-init-hook #'elpaca-process-queues)
(elpaca `(,@@elpaca-order))
@end lisp

@itemize
@item
Windows users must be able to create symlinks@footnote{@uref{https://www.howtogeek.com/16226/complete-guide-to-symbolic-links-symlinks-on-windows-or-linux/, windows symlink guide}}, or enable @samp{elpaca-no-symlink-mode}
@end itemize

@lisp
;; Uncomment for systems which cannot create symlinks:
;; (elpaca-no-symlink-mode)
@end lisp

You'll also want to disable package.el in your early-init file@footnote{@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Early-Init-File.html, early-init file}}:

@lisp
(setq package-enable-at-startup nil)
@end lisp

And remove anything related to package.el in your init file. e.g. calls to @code{(package-activate-all)}.

@node Usage
@chapter Usage

@menu
* Quick Start::
* Basic concepts::
* use-package Integration::
@end menu

@node Quick Start
@section Quick Start

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Operation
@tab UI (keys apply in elpaca-ui-mode)
@tab completing-read interface commands
@item Finding Packages
@tab @code{M-x elpaca-manager}
@tab @code{elpaca-try}
@item Trying Packages (for current session)
@tab @code{i} @code{x}
@tab @code{elpaca-try}
@item Fetching Package Updates
@tab @code{f} @code{x}
@tab @code{elpaca-fetch} or @code{elpaca-fetch-all}
@item Merging Updates
@tab @code{u} @code{x}
@tab @code{elpaca-merge} or @code{elpaca-merge-all}
@item Pulling Updates@math{^*}
@tab @code{C-u u} @code{x}
@tab @code{C-u M-x} @code{elpaca-merge} or @code{C-u M-x} @code{elpaca-merge-all}
@item Rebuilding Packages
@tab @code{r} @code{x}
@tab @code{elpaca-rebuild}
@item Deleting Packages
@tab @code{d} @code{x}
@tab @code{elpaca-delete}
@item View Package Logs
@tab @code{l} filters log to current package
@tab @code{elpaca-log}
@item View Package Statuses
@tab @code{t} show most recent log entries
@tab @code{elpaca-status}
@item Visit Package Repository Directory
@tab @code{v}
@tab @code{elpaca-visit}
@item Visit Package Build Directory
@tab @code{C-u} @code{v}
@tab @code{C-u M-x} @code{elpaca-visit}
@item Browse Package Website
@tab @code{b}
@tab @code{elpaca-browse}
@end multitable
​* It's encouraged to fetch, review, and @strong{then} merge package updates rather than pulling.


Packages installed via the above commands are not loaded on subsequent Emacs sessions (after restarting).
To install and load packages persistently (across Emacs restarts), use the @samp{elpaca} macro in your init file after the installer. (@ref{Installer, , installer})

For example:

@lisp
;; Install use-package support
(elpaca elpaca-use-package
  ;; Enable :elpaca use-package keyword.
  (elpaca-use-package-mode)
  ;; Assume :elpaca t unless otherwise specified.
  (setq elpaca-use-package-by-default t))

;; Block until current queue processed.
(elpaca-wait)

;;When installing a package which modifies a form used at the top-level
;;(e.g. a package which adds a use-package key word),
;;use `elpaca-wait' to block until that package has been installed/configured.
;;For example:
;;(use-package general :demand t)
;;(elpaca-wait)

;; Expands to: (elpaca evil (use-package evil :demand t))
(use-package evil :demand t)

;;Turns off elpaca-use-package-mode current declaration
;;Note this will cause the declaration to be interpreted immediately (not deferred).
;;Useful for configuring built-in emacs features.
(use-package emacs :elpaca nil :config (setq ring-bell-function #'ignore))

;; Don't install anything. Defer execution of BODY
(elpaca nil (message "deferred"))
@end lisp

@strong{IMPORTANT}:

Elpaca installs and activates packages asynchronously.
Elpaca processes its package queues @emph{after} Emacs reads the init file.@footnote{This is so Elpaca can build a proper dependency tree. It ensures packages the user explicitly requests are not preempted by dependencies of other packages.}
Consider the following example:

@lisp
(elpaca nil (message "First")) ; Queue First
(message "Second") ; Second messaged
(elpaca nil (message "Third")) ; Queue Third
(elpaca-process-queues) ; Process queue: First messaged, Third messaged.
@end lisp

``Second'' will be message @emph{before} ``First'' and ``Third''.
Defer forms which are dependent on deferred forms.
Wrapping the ``Second'' message in an @samp{elpaca} declaration will fix the above example:

@lisp
(elpaca nil (message "First"))  ; Queue First
(elpaca nil (message "Second")) ; Queue Second
(elpaca nil (message "Third"))  ; Queue Third
(elpaca-process-queues) ; Process queue: First, Second, Third messaged.
@end lisp

Add any configuration which relies on @samp{after-init-hook}, @samp{emacs-startup-hook}, etc to @samp{elpaca-after-init-hook} so it runs after Elpaca has activated all queued packages.
This includes loading of saved customizations. e.g.

@lisp
(setq custom-file (expand-file-name "customs.el" user-emacs-directory))
(add-hook 'elpaca-after-init-hook (lambda () (load custom-file 'noerror)))
@end lisp

@node Basic concepts
@section Basic concepts

The @samp{elpaca-example} macro in the following examples reduces verbosity.
It is not part of Elpaca.

@lisp
(defun elpaca-example-sort-plist (plist)
  "Return copy of PLIST with :package followed by lexically sorted key/val pairs."
  `(:package ,(plist-get plist :package)
             ,@@(cl-loop for k in (cl-sort (cl-loop for key in plist by #'cddr
                                                   unless (eq key :package) collect key)
                                          #'string< :key #'symbol-name)
                        append (list k (plist-get plist k)))))

(defmacro elpaca-example (&rest body)
  "Execute BODY with a clean elpaca environment."
  `(let (elpaca-cache-menu-items
         elpaca-order-functions
         elpaca-recipe-functions
         elpaca--menu-items-cache
         (elpaca-menu-functions '(elpaca-example-menu)))
     ;; Prevent cache corruption
     (cl-letf (((symbol-function 'elpaca--write-menu-cache) #'ignore))
       (elpaca-example-sort-plist ,@@body))))
@end lisp

Examples will use the following recipe menu.
(@ref{Menus, , recipe menu})
It offers a ``burger'' package recipe:

@lisp
(defun elpaca-example-menu (_)
  '((burger . (:recipe ( :buns 2
                         :lettuce t
                         :tomato t
                         :beef t
                         :cheese t
                         :cook well-done
                         :from elpaca-example-menu)))))
@end lisp

@menu
* Recipes::                      The recipe format description.
* Menus::                        Where recipes come from.
* Orders::                       Incomplete, or custom recipes.
* Queues::                       Order processing groups.
* Installing Packages::
@end menu

@node Recipes
@subsection Recipes

A recipe provides Elpaca with the metadata necessary to build and install a package.
It is a list of the form:

@lisp
(ITEM . PROPS)
@end lisp

@emph{ITEM} is a symbol uniquely identifying the package.
@emph{PROPS} is a plist with any of the following recipe keywords:

@menu
* host |fetcher: host | fetcher. 
* repo::
* branch::
* tag::
* ref::
* pin::
* depth::
* files::
* protocol::
* remotes::
* main::
* build::
* inherit::
* pre-build::
* post-build::
* autoloads::
* Inheritance precedence::
* elpaca-recipe-functions::
@end menu

@node host | fetcher
@subsubsection :host | :fetcher

A symbol or string representing the hosting service of the repository.
If a string is used, it is inserted in the URI verbatim.

@lisp
(example :host github)
(example :fetcher gitlab)
(example :host "www.example.com")
@end lisp

@node repo
@subsubsection :repo

A string of the form @samp{USER/REPO} when used with the @samp{:host} keyword; a local file path or remote URL when @samp{:host} is not used.

@lisp
(example :host github :repo "user/example") ;;downloaded from github
@end lisp

@lisp
(local :repo "~/repos/local/") ;;cloned from local filesystem
@end lisp

@lisp
(remote :repo "https://foo.example/example.git") ;;remote clone
@end lisp

@node branch
@subsubsection :branch

The repository branch to check out when installing the package.

@lisp
(example :host github :repo "user/example" :branch "main")
@end lisp

@node tag
@subsubsection :tag

The tag to check out when installing the package.

@lisp
(example :host github :repo "user/example" :tag "v1.0")
@end lisp

@node ref
@subsubsection :ref

The git ref@footnote{@uref{https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Git-References, git ref}} to check out when installing the package.

@lisp
(example :host github :repo "user/example" :ref "a76ca0a") ;; Check out a specific commit.
@end lisp

@node pin
@subsubsection :pin

When non-nil, ignore the package during update commands.

@lisp
(example :pin t)
@end lisp

@node depth
@subsubsection :depth

The package repository's history depth.

@lisp
(example :depth 1) ;; Shallow clone with history truncated to 1 commit.
(example :depth nil) ;; Full repository clone.
@end lisp

@node files
@subsubsection :files

The files linked from the package's repository to its build directory.

Each element of the list is either:
@itemize
@item
The symbol @samp{:defaults}, which expands to @samp{elpaca-default-files-directive}.
@item
A string naming files or folders. Shell glob patterns may be used to match multiple files.
@item
A list starting with the @samp{:exclude} keyword. The remaining elements are not linked.
@end itemize

@lisp
(example :files (:defaults "extensions/*")) ;; Link everything in the extensions folder.
(example :files (:defaults (:exclude "*.c"))) ;; Exclude all files with the "c" file extension.
@end lisp

@node protocol
@subsubsection :protocol

The protocol to use when cloning repositories.

The value must be a symbol, either @samp{https} or @samp{ssh}.

@lisp
(example :protocol https) ; Use the https protocol.
(example :protocol ssh) ; Use the ssh protocol.
@end lisp

@node remotes
@subsubsection :remotes

Configures the repository remotes@footnote{@uref{https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Working-with-Remotes, remotes}}.

The value must be a single remote spec or a list of remote specs.
The first remote given will have its ref checked out when cloning the repository.
A spec may be a string to rename the default remote.
The following will rename the cloned remote (usually ``origin'' by git convention) to ``upstream'':

@lisp
(example :remotes "upstream")
@end lisp

In order to add a another remote, a spec may be a list of the form:

@lisp
("NAME" [PROPS])
@end lisp

@emph{NAME} is a string indicating the name of the remote.
@emph{PROPS} is an optional plist used to override inherited recipe keywords.

For example:

@lisp
(example :host github :repo "upstream/example"
         :remotes ("fork" :repo "fork/zenburn-emacs"))
@end lisp

Will add a remote named fork which points to a repository hosted on the same forge as the upstream remote.
The following does the same above, additionally adding a third remote at a different forge.

@lisp
(example :host github :repo "upstream/example"
         :remotes (("fork" :repo "fork/zenburn-emacs") ; :host github inherited from above
                   ("other" :host gitlab :repo "other/zenburn-emacs")))
@end lisp

@node main
@subsubsection :main

The name of the main elisp file.
When provided this can speed up the process of cloning and loading a package's dependencies.
When declared @samp{nil}, skip dependency check.

@lisp
(example :main "example.el")
@end lisp

@lisp
(example :main nil)
@end lisp

@node build
@subsubsection :build

A list of build steps, nil or t.
To remove steps from @samp{elpaca-default-build-steps} by starting the list with the @samp{:not} keyword.

@lisp
(example :build (:not elpaca--byte-compile))
@end lisp

@node inherit
@subsubsection :inherit

When non-nil, inherit @emph{PROPS} from @samp{elpaca-order-functions} and possibly @samp{elpaca-menu-functions}.
For example, without inheritance:

@lisp
(elpaca-example (elpaca-recipe '(burger :inherit nil)))
@end lisp

returns the recipe as declared:

@lisp
(:package "burger" :inherit nil)
@end lisp

With inheritance enabled:

@lisp
(elpaca-example (elpaca-recipe '(burger :inherit t)))
@end lisp

@lisp
(:package "burger" :beef t :buns 2 :cheese t :cook well-done :from
          elpaca-example-menu :inherit t :lettuce t :tomato t)
@end lisp

the elpaca-example-menu provides the rest of the ``burger'' recipe.

The value may also be a menu symbol or list of menu symbols.
This is a per-recipe way of setting @samp{elpaca-menu-functions}.

@lisp
(elpaca-example (elpaca-recipe '(burger :inherit elpaca-example-menu)))
@end lisp

@lisp
(:package "burger" :beef t :buns 2 :cheese t :cook well-done :from
          elpaca-example-menu :inherit elpaca-example-menu :lettuce t :tomato t)
@end lisp

@node pre-build
@subsubsection :pre-build

Commands and/or elisp evaluated prior to @samp{:build} steps.
Each command is either an elisp form or a list of strings executed in a shell context of the form:

@lisp
("executable" "argument"...)
@end lisp

For example:

@lisp
(elpaca (example :pre-build (("configure") ("make" "install"))))
@end lisp

@node post-build
@subsubsection :post-build

The same as @samp{:pre-build}, but run just before activating a package.

@lisp
(elpaca (example :post-build (message "activate next")))
@end lisp

@node autoloads
@subsubsection :autoloads

The name of the file the package's autoload file.
When @samp{nil}, autoload loading and generation are disabled for the package.
When @samp{t}, the default autoload file is generated/loaded (@samp{PACKAGE-NAME-autoloads.el}).
The value may also be a string which is expanded relative to the package's build directory.
e.g. @samp{"org-loaddefs.el"}.

@node Inheritance precedence
@subsubsection Inheritance precedence

The following list shows the order of precedence for inheritance.
Each item takes precedence over the items which follow it.

@itemize
@item
elpaca-recipe-functions
@item
declared recipe
@item
elpaca-order-functions
@item
elpaca-menu-functions
@end itemize

@lisp
(elpaca-example
 (let ((elpaca-recipe-functions (lambda (recipe) '(:from recipe-functions :cheese extra)))
       (elpaca-order-functions (lambda (order) '(:from order-functions :tomato nil))))
   (elpaca-recipe '(burger))))
@end lisp

@lisp
(:package "burger" :beef t :buns 2 :cheese extra :cook well-done :from
          recipe-functions :lettuce t :tomato nil)
@end lisp

@node elpaca-recipe-functions
@subsubsection elpaca-recipe-functions

The abnormal hook @samp{elpaca-recipe-functions} runs via @samp{run-hook-with-args-until-success} just before installing the package.
Each function in the list should accept the current recipe as its sole argument and return either nil or a plist.
The first function to return a plist has its return value merged with the current recipe.

This is useful if you want to guarantee the values of certain keywords despite allowing recipe inheritance.

@lisp
(elpaca-example
 (let ((elpaca-recipe-functions
        '((lambda (recipe)
            "If a recipe calls for cheese, I always want extra."
            (when (plist-get recipe :cheese) (list :cheese 'extra))))))
   (elpaca-recipe '(burger))))
@end lisp

@lisp
(:package "burger" :beef t :buns 2 :cheese extra :cook well-done :from
          elpaca-example-menu :lettuce t :tomato t)
@end lisp

@node Menus
@subsection Menus

A menu is a function which returns an alist of the form:
@lisp
((ITEM . DATA)...)
@end lisp

@emph{ITEM} is a symbol uniquely identifying a package.
@emph{DATA} is a plist of package metadata.
@emph{DATA} must contain the following keywords:

@table @asis
@item :recipe
A package recipe. (@ref{Recipes, , recipe})
@item :source
A string naming the menu.
@end table

It may also provide additional information about a package.
For example, the Elpaca UI utilizes the following keywords when present:

@table @asis
@item :url
The package's website URL@.
@item :description
A description of the package.
@item :date 
The time of package's last update.
@end table

The function must accept one of the following @emph{REQUEST} symbols as an argument:

@table @asis
@item index
Return the alist described above
@item update
update the menu's alist.
@end table

@lisp
(defun elpaca-menu-minimal (request_)
  "A minimal menu example.
Ignore REQUEST, as this is a static, curated list of packages."
  '((example :source "EXAMPLE" :recipe (example :host github :repo "user/example"))
    (two :source "EXAMPLE" :recipe (two :host gitlab :repo "user/two"))))
@end lisp

Menus allow one to offer Elpaca users curated lists of package recipes.
For example, @uref{https://www.github.com/progfolio/melpulls, melpulls} implements an Elpaca menu for pending MELPA packages.

@menu
* elpaca-menu-functions::
@end menu

@node elpaca-menu-functions
@subsubsection elpaca-menu-functions

The @samp{elpaca-menu-functions} variable contains menu functions for the following package sources by default:

@itemize
@item
@uref{https://www.github.com/melpa/melpa, MELPA}
@item
@uref{https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/emacs/org-mode.git/, Org}
@item
@uref{https://git.sr.ht/~bzg/org-contrib, Org-contrib}
@item
@uref{https://www.github.com/emacs-straight/gnu-elpa-mirror, GNU ELPA Mirror}
@item
@uref{https://elpa.nongnu.org, NonGNU ELPA}
@end itemize

Menus are checked in order until one returns the requested menu item or the menu list is exhausted.

@node Orders
@subsection Orders

At a minimum, an order is a symbol which represents the name of a menu item (@ref{Menus, , menu}):

@lisp
(elpaca example)
@end lisp

An order may also be a partial or full recipe:

@lisp
(elpaca (example :host gitlab))
(elpaca (example :host gitlab :repo "user/example" :inherit nil))
@end lisp

@menu
* elpaca-order-functions::
@end menu

@node elpaca-order-functions
@subsubsection elpaca-order-functions

The abnormal hook @samp{elpaca-order-functions} runs via @samp{run-hook-with-args-until-success} before @samp{elpaca-menu-functions}.
Each function in the list should accept the current order as its sole argument and return either nil or a plist.
The first function to return a plist has its return value merged with the current order.

This is useful for declaring default order properties.
For example, the following function disables recipe inheritance by default:

@lisp
(elpaca-example
 (let ((elpaca-order-functions '((lambda (_) '(:inherit nil)))))
   (elpaca-recipe 'burger)))
@end lisp

@lisp
(:package "burger" :inherit nil)
@end lisp

@node Queues
@subsection Queues

Elpaca installs packages asynchronously.
Orders (@ref{Orders, , orders}) are automatically queued in a list.
When all of a queues orders have either finished or failed Elpaca considers it ``processed''.

Queues ensure packages installation, activation, and configuration take place prior to packages in other queues.
The @samp{elpaca-queue} macro wraps calls to @samp{elpaca}. It places orders in its @emph{BODY} in their own queue.
This is especially useful when one wants to install a package to use later on in their init file.
For example, a package which implements an Elpaca menu (@ref{Menus, , menu}):

@lisp
(elpaca-queue
 (elpaca (melpulls :host github :repo "progfolio/melpulls")
   (add-to-list 'elpaca-menu-functions #'melpulls)
   (elpaca-update-menus #'melpulls)))
;; Implicitly queued into a new queue.
(elpaca menu-item-available-in-melpulls)
@end lisp

@node Installing Packages
@subsection Installing Packages

@table @asis
@item elpaca
@samp{(order &rest body)}
@end table
Installs @emph{ORDER} (@ref{Orders, , orders}) and executes @emph{BODY} after processing ORDER's queue (@ref{Queues, , queue}).

This macro is for programmatic use in one's init file.
Any of the following will install the ``example'' package:

@lisp
(elpaca example) ;; recipe looked up in `elpaca-menu-functions'.
@end lisp

@lisp
(elpaca example (message "Messaged after the order's queue has processed."))
@end lisp

@lisp
(elpaca (example :host github :repo "user/example"))
@end lisp

@lisp
(elpaca `(example :host github :repo "user/example"
                  ,@@(when (eq system-type 'darwin) ;; backqouting supported
                      (list :pre-build ((message "Mac specific pre-build"))))))
@end lisp

If @emph{ORDER} is nil, @emph{BODY} is still executed after processing the current queue.

@lisp
(elpaca first (message "First configured"))
;; If this weren't wrapped in an `elpaca' call, it would execute FIRST
;; Due to the "first" and "third" package installing asynchronously.
(elpaca nil (message "Second"))
(elpaca third (message "Third configured"))
@end lisp

Interactively evaluating an @samp{elpaca} declaration will re-process the order.
This can be used to change a package's recipe prior to rebuilding it.
Note that rebuilding a package does not @strong{reload} a package.
It's best to restart Emacs after a successful rebuild if you wish to have the changes loaded.

@node use-package Integration
@section use-package Integration

Adding the following elisp to your init file will enable Elpaca's optional integration with the use-package configuration macro:

@lisp
(elpaca elpaca-use-package
  ;; Enable :elpaca use-package keyword.
  (elpaca-use-package-mode)
  ;; Assume :elpaca t unless otherwise specified.
  (setq elpaca-use-package-by-default t))

;; Necessary to use the `:elpaca' use-package keyword at the top-level.
(elpaca-wait)
@end lisp

@lisp
(use-package example)
@end lisp

Expands to:

@lisp
(elpaca example (use-package example))
@end lisp

The @samp{:elpaca} use-package keyword can also accept a recipe

@lisp
(use-package example :elpaca (:host host :repo "user/repo"))
@end lisp

Expands to:

@lisp
(elpaca (example :host host :repo "user/repo")
  (use-package example))
@end lisp

When installing a package which modifies a form used at the top-level (e.g. a package which adds a use-package key word), use `elpaca-wait' to block until that package has been installed and configured.
For example:

@lisp
(use-package general :demand t)
(elpaca-wait)
;; use-package declarations beyond this point may use the `:general' use-package keyword.
@end lisp


In order to turn off @samp{elpaca-use-package-mode} for a given delcaration, specify @samp{:elpaca nil}:

@lisp
;; `emacs' is a pseudo-feature which can to configure built-in functionality.
(use-package emacs :elpaca nil :config (setq ring-bell-function #'ignore))
@end lisp

Note this will cause the declaration to be interpreted immediately (not deferred).

@node UI
@chapter UI

Elpaca has a UI mode available for managing packages.
The main entry points to the UI are the @samp{elpaca-manager}, @samp{elpaca-log}, and @samp{elpaca-status} commands.
Each of these commands utilize @samp{elpaca-ui-mode}.

The following commands are available in the @samp{elpaca-ui-mode}:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Command
@tab Binding
@tab Description
@item elpaca-ui-send-input
@tab !
@tab Send input string to current process.
@item elpaca-ui-show-hidden-rows
@tab +
@tab Append rows up to N times ‘elpaca-ui-row-limit’.
@item elpaca-ui-search-installed
@tab I
@tab Search for ``#unique #installed''
@item elpaca-ui-search-marked
@tab M
@tab Search for ``#unique #marked''
@item elpaca-ui-search-orphaned
@tab O
@tab Search for ``#unique #orphan''
@item elpaca-ui-search-refresh
@tab R
@tab Rerun the current search for BUFFER@.
@item elpaca-ui-info
@tab RET
@tab Show info for current package.
@item elpaca-ui-search-tried
@tab T
@tab Search for ``#unique #installed !#declared''
@item elpaca-ui-unmark
@tab U
@tab Unmark current package.
@item elpaca-ui-browse-package
@tab b
@tab Browse current package’s URL via ‘browse-url’.
@item elpaca-ui-copy
@tab c
@tab Copy formatted UI view ENTRIES to clipboard.
@item elpaca-ui-mark-delete
@tab d
@tab Mark package at point for ‘elpaca-delete’.
@item elpaca-ui-mark-fetch
@tab f
@tab Mark package at point for ‘elpaca-fetch’.
@item elpaca-ui-mark-try
@tab i
@tab Mark package at point for ‘elpaca-try’.
@item elpaca-log
@tab l
@tab Display ‘elpaca-log-buffer’ filtered by QUERY@.
@item elpaca-manager
@tab m
@tab Display elpaca’s package management UI@.
@item elpaca-ui-mark-rebuild
@tab r
@tab Mark package at point for ‘elpaca-rebuild’.
@item elpaca-ui-search
@tab s
@tab Filter current buffer by QUERY@. If QUERY is nil, prompt for it.
@item elpaca-status
@tab t
@tab Log most recent events for packages.
@item elpaca-ui-mark-merge
@tab u
@tab Mark package at point for ‘elpaca-merge’.
@item elpaca-ui-visit
@tab v
@tab Visit current package’s repo or BUILD directory.
@item elpaca-ui-execute-marks
@tab x
@tab Execute each mark in ‘elpaca-ui-marked-packages’.
@end multitable

@defun elpaca-manager 
Display packages registered with Elpaca.
Packages can searched for, installed, updated, rebuilt, and deleted from this interface.
When @samp{RECACHE} is non-nil, via lisp or interactively via the @samp{universal-argument}, recompute Elpaca's menu item cache before display.
@end defun

@defun elpaca-log 
Display the log for queued packages filtered by @samp{QUERY}.
For acceptable values for @samp{QUERY} see @ref{Searching, , searching}.
@end defun

@defun elpaca-status
Display the log for the most recent events for queued packages.
This allows one to quickly determine the status and reason for the status of each queued package.
@end defun

@menu
* Searching::                    How to search within the Elpaca UI.
* Search tags::
@end menu

@node Searching
@section Searching

The @samp{elpaca-ui-search} command (@samp{s}) prompts the user for a search query in the minibuffer.
Altering the query updates the UI table.
Calling with a @samp{universal-argument} (@samp{C-u}) populates the minibuffer with the current search query for editing.
Setting the query to an empty string resets the query to @samp{elpaca-ui-default-query}.
The buffer's header line displays the current query.

Queries are regular expressions checked against each row of the UI table.
For example, @samp{test} will match any row which contains the string ``test''.
Some characters change the matching behavior in queries.

The pipe character, @samp{|}, will delimit text searches to specific columns of the table.
Considering the following table:

@multitable {aaaaaa} {aaaaa} {aaaaa} {a}
@headitem number
@tab A
@tab B
@tab C
@item 1
@tab one
@tab two
@tab 3
@item 2
@tab four
@tab five
@tab 6
@item 3
@tab seven
@tab eight
@tab 9
@end multitable

The query @samp{o} will match rows 1 (on @samp{one}) and 2 (on @samp{four}).
The query @samp{3|} will only search for @samp{3} in the first column and match row three.
While @samp{|||3} Will search for @samp{3} in the 4th column of the table and match row 1.

The pound (a.k.a. hash) character, @samp{#}, followed by the name of a search tag filters table entries.
For example @samp{#random} will display 10 random entries.
If the search tag accepts arguments they may passed by wrapping the tag name in parenthesis.
e.g. @samp{#(random 20)} will display 20 random entries.

@node Search tags
@section Search tags

@defopt elpaca-ui-search-tags
An alist of with elements of the form (NAME . FILTER).
@samp{NAME} is a unique symbol describing the filter function.
The user types name after @samp{#} in the minibuffer to apply the filter.
@samp{FILTER} is a function which must accept a list of @samp{tabulated-list-entries} as its first argument.
It may accept additional, optional arguments.
The function must return a list of @samp{tabulated-list-entries}.

For example, the following search tag will embolden the first column of the @samp{elpaca-manager} table when the search query contains @samp{#bold-names}:
@end defopt

@lisp
(defun +elpaca-bold-names (entries)
  (cl-loop for entry in entries
           for copy = (copy-tree entry)
           for cols = (cadr copy)
           for name = (aref cols 0)
           do (setf (aref cols 0) (propertize name 'face '(:weight bold)))
           collect copy))

(cl-pushnew (cons 'bold-names #'+elpaca-bold-names) elpaca-ui-search-tags)
@end lisp

@bye
